Docs: Add HowTo on writing workflows (#4112)
aiidateam/aiida-core: docs/source/howto/workflows.rst

How to run multi-step workflows
*******************************

.. _how-to:workflows:write:

Writing workflows
=================

A workflow in AiiDA is a :ref:`process <topics:processes:concepts>` that calls other workflows and calculations and optionally *returns* data and as such can encode the logic of a typical scientific workflow.
Currently, there are two ways of implementing a workflow process:

 * :ref:`work functions<topics:workflows:concepts:workfunctions>`
 * :ref:`work chains<topics:workflows:concepts:workchains>`

Here we present a brief introduction on how to write both workflow types.

.. note::

>     For more details on the concept of a workflow, and the different between a work function and a work chain, please see the corresponding :ref:`topics section<topics:workflows:concepts>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    For more details on the concept of a workflow, and the difference between a work function and a work chain, please see the corresponding :ref:`topics section<topics:workflows:concepts>`.
```

Work function
-------------

> A *work function* is a process function that calls one or more calculation functions and *returns* data that has been *created* by the calculation functions it has called.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A *work function* is a process function that calls one or more other process functions and *returns* data that has been *created* by the calculation functions it has called.
```
Not sure if process functions will already be clear to the reader here, but it is important to note, I think, that a work function can also call other work functions, and not just calc functions.

Now that I read it back. Maybe keep the sentence as is and add another one that says that it can also call other work functions, allowing to write nested workflows

> Writing a work function that can be stored in the provenance simply involves writing a Python function that calls a set of calculation functions with the desired logic and decorating it with the ``@workfunction`` decorator:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Writing a work function, whose provenance is automatically stored, is as simple as writing a Python function and decorating it with the ``@workfunction`` decorator:
```

Reviewer: Also, maybe ``@workfunction`` should become an actual API reference link

> Writing a work function that can be stored in the provenance simply involves writing a Python function that calls a set of calculation functions with the desired logic and decorating it with the ``@workfunction`` decorator:

Reviewer 2: Should we create an API reference for `@workfunction`?

.. code-block:: python

    from aiida.engine import calcfunction, workfunction
    from aiida.orm import Int

    @calcfunction
    def add(x, y):
        return x + y

    @calcfunction
    def multiply(x, y):
        return x * y

    @workfunction
    def add_and_multiply(x, y, z):

>         sum = add(x, y)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        addition = add(x, y)
```

Reviewer: Seeing this discrepancy, is there a way to automatically copy/paste the actual content of the `aiida.workflows.arithmetic.add_multiply` module? This would prevent the docs from going out of sync by accident

Author: I think you can use `.. include::` for this? I did this earlier for the tutorial, but since we separated the `arithmetic` processes from the docs, I added the actual code.

>         product = multiply(sum, z)
>         return product

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        return multiply(sum, z)
```

Author: For now I would leave the code examples in the how-to as it is currently implemented in develop. Later we can adjust the code and use `.. include::` to add it directly. I've added this change to the `add_multiply` work function to a local branch where I can still do some small tweaks on the `arithmetic` processes.

Reviewer 2: Ok, sure, then let's leave that. I'm just usually striving to keep the demonstrative examples in the How-Tos as concise as possible.

Reviewer: OK, I will just create a ticket on the project to make sure to quickly update this once we have merged docs-revamp into develop

Reviewer: See #4128

>     result = add_and_multiply(Int(1), Int(2), Int(3))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    result = add_multiply(Int(1), Int(2), Int(3))
```

> It is important to reiterate here that the ``@workfunction``-decorated ``add_and_multiply`` function does not *create* any new data nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is important to reiterate here that the ``@workfunction``-decorated ``add_multiply`` function does not *create* any new data nodes.
```

> The ``add`` and ``multiply`` calculation functions create the ``Int`` data nodes, all the work function does is *return* the results of the ``multiply`` calculation function.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ``add()`` and ``multiply()`` calculation functions create the ``Int`` data nodes, all the work function does is *return* the results of the ``multiply()`` calculation function.
```

> Moreover, both calculation and workflow functions can only accept and return data nodes, i.e. instances of classes that subclass the ``Data`` class.

Reviewer 2: Can we add an API reference here?

Work chain
----------

> When the workflow you want to run that is more expensive and complex, it is better to write a *work chain*.

Reviewer: Not sure the word "expensive" is going to be clear here.
Have the readers at this point already read the fact that you cannot submit a process function and therefore cannot shut down your computer until it has finished? If so, I would maybe refer to it as "is more complex and takes longer to run"

> Writing a work chain in AiiDA requires creating a class that inherits from the ``WorkChain`` class and defines the work chain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Writing a work chain in AiiDA requires creating a class that inherits from the ``WorkChain`` class.
```

Below is an example of a work chain that takes three integers as inputs, multiplies the first two and then adds the third to obtain the final result:

.. code-block:: python

    from aiida.orm import Code, Int
    from aiida.engine import calcfunction, WorkChain, ToContext

>     from aiida.plugins.factories import CalculationFactory

Reviewer: *SPH hyper-nitpick-mode-engaged*: I try to keep imports alphabetically sorted. If they get larger, makes it easy to quickly scan it

Author: I can see the value in that ^^

Author: However, I'll keep the example as is for now, since we'll probably include the code directly once this is merged into `develop`?

Reviewer: Fine to keep here for now. We will take care of it in #4128 once `docs-revamp` is merged in `develop`

    ArithmeticAddCalculation = CalculationFactory('arithmetic.add')

    @calcfunction
    def multiply(x, y):
        return x * y

    class MultiplyAddWorkChain(WorkChain):
        """WorkChain for testing and demonstration purposes."""

        @classmethod
        def define(cls, spec):
            """Specify inputs and outputs."""

>             super(MultiplyAddWorkChain, cls).define(spec)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            super().define(spec)
```

            spec.input('x', valid_type=Int)
            spec.input('y', valid_type=Int)
            spec.input('z', valid_type=Int)
            spec.input('code', valid_type=Code)
            spec.outline(
                cls.multiply,
                cls.add,
                cls.validate_result,
                cls.result
            )
            spec.output('result', valid_type=Int)
            spec.exit_code(400, 'ERROR_NEGATIVE_NUMBER',
                message='The result is a negative number.')

        def multiply(self):
            """Multiply two integers."""
            self.ctx.multiple = multiply(self.inputs.x, self.inputs.y)

        def add(self):
            """Add two numbers with the ArithmeticAddCalculation process."""

            inputs = {'x': self.ctx.multiple, 'y': self.inputs.z, 'code': self.inputs.code}
            future = self.submit(ArithmeticAddCalculation, **inputs)

>             return ToContext({'addition': future})

Reviewer: Something as for the work function: can we just literal-include here somehow?
```suggestion
            return ToContext(addition=future)
```

        def validate_result(self):

            result = self.ctx['addition'].outputs.sum

            if result.value < 0:
                return self.exit_codes.ERROR_NEGATIVE_NUMBER

        def result(self):
            self.out('result', self.ctx['addition'].outputs.sum)

You can give the work chain any valid Python class name, but the convention is to have it end in ``WorkChain`` so that it is always immediately clear what it references.
Let's go over the methods of the ``MultiplyAddWorkChain`` one by one:

.. code-block:: python

    @classmethod
    def define(cls, spec):
        """Specify inputs and outputs."""

>         super(MultiplyAddWorkChain, cls).define(spec)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        super().define(spec)
```

        spec.input('x', valid_type=Int)
        spec.input('y', valid_type=Int)
        spec.input('z', valid_type=Int)
        spec.input('code', valid_type=Code)
        spec.outline(
            cls.multiply,
            cls.add,
            cls.validate_result,
            cls.result
        )
        spec.output('result', valid_type=Int)
        spec.exit_code(400, 'ERROR_NEGATIVE_NUMBER',
            message='The result is a negative number.')

The most important method to implement for every work chain is the ``define()`` method.
This class method must always start by calling the ``define()`` method of its parent class.

> Next, the ``define()`` method allows the developer to define the characteristics of the work chain, which are contained in the work chain ``spec``:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, the ``define()`` method should be used to define the specifications of the work chain, which are contained in the work chain ``spec``:
```

* the **inputs**, specified using the ``spec.input()`` method.
  The first argument of the ``input()`` method is a string that specifies the label of the input, e.g. ``'x'``.
  The ``valid_type`` keyword argument allows you to specify the required node type of the input.
  Other keyword arguments allow the developer to set a default for the input, or indicate that an input should not be stored in the database, see :ref:`the process topics section <topics:processes:usage:spec>` for more details.
* the **outline** or logic of the workflow, specified using the ``spec.outline()`` method.
  The outline of the workflow is constructed from the methods of the ``WorkChain`` class.

>   For the ``MultiplyAddWorkChain``, the outline is a simple linear sequence of steps, but it's possible to define more complex workflows as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  For the ``MultiplyAddWorkChain``, the outline is a simple linear sequence of steps, but it's possible to include actual logic, directly in the outline, in order to define more complex workflows as well.
```

  See the :ref:`work chain outline section <topics:workflows:usage:workchains:define_outline>` for more details.
* the **outputs**, specified using the ``spec.output()`` method.
  This method is very similar in its usage to the ``input()`` method.
* the **exit codes** of the work chain, specified using the ``spec.exit_code()`` method.
  Exit codes are used to clearly communicate known failure modes of the work chain to the user.

>   The first and second arguments define the ``exit_status`` of the work chain in case of failure (``400``) and the string that the developer can use to reference to the exit code (``ERROR_NEGATIVE_NUMBER``).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The first and second arguments define the ``exit_status`` of the work chain in case of failure (``400``) and the string that the developer can use to reference the exit code (``ERROR_NEGATIVE_NUMBER``).
```

  A descriptive exit message can be provided using the ``message`` keyword argument.
  For the ``MultiplyAddWorkChain``, we demand that the final result is not a negative number, which is checked in the ``validate_result`` step of the outline.

.. note::

    For more information on the ``define()`` method and the process spec, see the :ref:`corresponding section in the topics <topics:processes:usage:defining>`.

.. code-block:: python

    def multiply(self):
        """Multiply two integers."""

>         self.ctx.multiple = multiply(self.inputs.x, self.inputs.y)

Reviewer: Should this maybe be moved after the following sentence? "The ``multiply`` method is the first. ...."
Right now it comes a bit out of the blue after the last `.. note::`

The ``multiply`` method is the first step in the outline of the ``MultiplyAddWorkChain`` work chain.
This step simply involves running the calculation function ``multiply``, on the ``x`` and ``y`` **inputs** of the work chain.
To store the result of this function and use it in the next step of the outline, it is added to the *context* of the work chain using ``self.ctx``.

.. code-block:: python

    def add(self):
        """Add two numbers with the ArithmeticAddCalculation process."""

        inputs = {'x': self.ctx.multiple, 'y': self.inputs.z, 'code': self.inputs.code}
        calcjob_node = self.submit(ArithmeticAddCalculation, **inputs)

>         return ToContext({'addition': calcjob_node})

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        return ToContext(addition=calcjob_node})
```
Make sure that all snippets match exactly that of the literal-included source code

The ``add`` method is the second step in the outline of the work chain.
As this step uses the ``ArithmeticAddCalculation`` calculation job, we start by setting up the inputs for this ``CalcJob`` in a dictionary.

> Next, when submitting this calculation job to the daemon, it is important to use the submit method from the work chain instance via ``self.submit()``.

Reviewer: should we add an explicit warning not to use the global submit function? @csadorf what do you think. Is this clear enough?

Reviewer 2: Yes, I think that would be justified.

Reviewer: @mbercx please add this explicit warning and then we can merge this.

Author: Done!

To tell the work chain to wait for this process to finish before continuing the workflow, we return the ``ToContext`` class, where we have passed a dictionary to specify that the future calculation job node should be assigned to the ``'addition'`` context key.

.. note::
    Instead of passing a dictionary, you can also initialize a ``ToContext`` instance by passing the future process as a keyword argument, e.g. ``ToContext(addition=calcjob_node)``.
    More information on the ``ToContext`` class can be found in :ref:`the topics section on submitting sub processes<topics:workflows:usage:workchains:submitting_sub_processes>`.

.. code-block:: python

    def validate_result(self):

        result = self.ctx['addition'].outputs.sum

        if result.value < 0:
            return self.exit_codes.ERROR_NEGATIVE_NUMBER

Once the ``ArithmeticAddCalculation`` calculation job is finished, the next step in the work chain is to validate the result, i.e. verify that the result is not a negative number.
After the ``addition`` node has been extracted from the context, we take the ``sum`` node from the ``ArithmeticAddCalculation`` outputs and store it in the ``result`` variable.

> In case the value of this ``Int`` node is negative, the ``ERROR_NEGATIVE_NUMBER`` exit code - defined in the ``define()`` method - is returned.

Reviewer: We should add here that when an exit code is returned from any outline step, the work chain will be terminated. No other steps will be executed

.. code-block:: python

    def result(self):
        self.out('result', self.ctx['addition'].outputs.sum)

The final step in the outline is to pass the result to the outputs of the work chain using the ``self.out()`` method.
The first argument (``'result'``) specifies the label of the output, which corresponds to the label provided to the spec in the ``define()`` method.
The second argument is the result of the work chain, extracted from the ``Int`` node stored in the context under the ``'addition'`` key.

> Hopefully you now have a basic understanding of how to implement workflows in AiiDA.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
